Docs/pluggable components (#2875)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/operations/components/pluggable-components/pluggable-components-registration.md

---
type: docs
title: "How-To: Register a pluggable component"
linkTitle: "How To: Register a pluggable component"
weight: 4500
description: "Learn how to register a pluggable component"
---

[uds]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_domain_socket

## Component Registration Process

Pluggable, [gRPC-based](https://grpc.io/) components are typically run as containers or processes that need to communicate with the Dapr runtime via [Unix Domain Sockets][uds]. They are automatically discovered and registered in the runtime with the following steps:

1. The component listens to an [Unix Domain Socket][uds] placed on the shared volume.
2. The Dapr runtime lists all [Unix Domain Socket][uds] in the shared volume.
3. The Dapr runtime connects with each socket and uses gRPC reflection to discover all proto services from a given building block API that the component implements.

A single component can implement multiple [building blocks]({{< ref building-blocks-concept.md >}}) at once.

<img src="/images/grpc-components.png" width=50%>

> While Dapr's built-in components come [are included with the runtime](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/docs/developing-component.md), pluggable components require a few setup steps before they can be used with Dapr.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While Dapr's built-in components [are included with the runtime](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/docs/developing-component.md), pluggable components require a few setup steps before they can be used with Dapr.
```

Dapr does not launch any pluggable components processes or containers. This is something that you need to do, and it will be different depending on how Dapr and your components are run:

- In self-hosted mode as processes or containers.
- In Kubernetes, as containers.

This also changes the approach to share [Unix Domain Socket][uds] files between Dapr and pluggable components.

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
As a prerequisite the operating system must supports Unix Domain Sockets, any UNIX or UNIX-like system (Mac, Linux, or for local development [WSL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) for Windows users) should be sufficient.
{{% /alert %}}

Select your environment to begin making your component discoverable.

{{< tabs "Standalone" "Kubernetes" >}}

{{% codetab %}}
[uds]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_domain_socket

## Run the component

Both your component and the Unix Socket must be running before Dapr starts.

By default, Dapr looks for [Unix Domain Socket][uds] files in the folder in `/tmp/dapr-components-sockets`.

> The name of the file without any extension is the name of the component. For example, for `memstore.sock`, the component name is `memstore`.

Reviewer: I think we should rewrite this to make the file name creation depend on the component's name. The way it is currently written is the other way around.

```suggestion
Filenames in this folder are significant for component registration. They must be formed by appending the component's name with a file extension of your choice, more commonly `.sock`. For example, the filename `memstore.sock` is a valid UDS file name for a component named `memstore`.
```

Author: @tmacam replace “discovery process ” by “register”

Reviewer: Updated.

Save the component YAML file in the components-path, replacing:

- `your_socket_goes_here` with your component socket name (no extension)
- `your_component_type` with your component type

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: prod-mystore
spec:
  type: your_component_type.your_socket_goes_here
  version: v1
  metadata:
```

Using the previous `memstore.sock` example:

- `your_component_type` would be replaced by `state`, as it is a state store.
- `your_socket_goes_here` would be replaced by `memstore`.

The full configuration for `memstore` would be:

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: prod-mystore
spec:
  type: state.memstore
  version: v1
  metadata:
```

Save this file as `component.yaml` in Dapr's component configuration folder.

## Run Dapr

[Initialize Dapr]({{< ref get-started-api.md >}}), and make sure that your component spec is placed in the right folder.

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
Dapr v1.9.0 is the minimum version that supports pluggable components.

> Run the following command specify the runtime version: dapr init --runtime-version 1.9.0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run the following command specify the runtime version: `dapr init --runtime-version 1.9.0`
```

---
type: docs
title: "How-To: Register a pluggable component"
linkTitle: "How To: Register a pluggable component"
weight: 4500
description: "Learn how to register a pluggable component"
---

[uds]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_domain_socket

## Component registration process

Pluggable, [gRPC-based](https://grpc.io/) components are typically run as containers or processes that need to communicate with the Dapr runtime via [Unix Domain Sockets][uds]. They are automatically discovered and registered in the runtime with the following steps:

1. The component listens to an [Unix Domain Socket][uds] placed on the shared volume.
2. The Dapr runtime lists all [Unix Domain Socket][uds] in the shared volume.
3. The Dapr runtime connects with each socket and uses gRPC reflection to discover all proto services from a given building block API that the component implements.

A single component can implement multiple component interfaces at once.

> <img src="/images/grpc-components.png" width=50%>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<img src="/images/components-pluggable-register-grpc.png" width=50%>
```

metadata:
  name: prod-mystore
spec:
  type: your_component_type.your_socket_goes_here
  version: v1
  metadata:
scopes:
  - backend
```

[Scope]({{< ref component-scopes >}}) your component to make sure that only the target application can connect with the pluggable component, since it will only be running in its deployment. Otherwise the runtime fails when initializing the component.

That's it! **[Apply the created manifests to your Kubernetes cluster](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/cheatsheet/#kubectl-apply)**, and call the state store APIs via Dapr API.

Use [Kubernetes pod forwarder](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/port-forward-access-application-cluster/) to access the `daprd` runtime.

See it in action by running the following. Replace `$PORT` with the Dapr HTTP port:

```shell
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '[{ "key": "name", "value": "Bruce Wayne", "metadata": {}}]' http://localhost:$PORT/v1.0/state/prod-mystore
```

Retrieve the value, replacing `$PORT` with the Dapr HTTP port:

```shell
curl http://localhost:$PORT/v1.0/state/prod-mystore/name
```

{{% /codetab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Next Steps

> Get started with your own .NET pluggable component using our [sample code](https://github.com/mcandeia/dapr-samples/tree/sample/pluggable-components/pluggable-components-dotnet-template)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Get started with developing .NET pluggable component using this [sample code](https://github.com/dapr/samples/tree/master/pluggable-components-dotnet-template)
```

Reviewer: How about?

> Get started ~~with~~ developing **a** .NET pluggable component using this [sample code](https://github.com/dapr/samples/tree/master/pluggable-components-dotnet-template)
